
# Foreword and Acknowledgements

The journey to this thesis began when I was looking for more applicable fields of research after doing my Diploma in particle physics phenomenology. By sheer coincidence, I wandered into a talk by a newly-appointed professor, Ivo Sbalzarini. Ivo's enthusiasm was apparent, and so I soon applied to do my PhD in his group in the IMPRS CellDevoSys at the Max Planck Institute for Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics in Dresden. Starting to work on microscope design (together with the lab of Pavel Tomancak), and control software (together with Lo誰c Royer and Martin Weigert of the lab of Gene Myers), it soon became apparent that the hardware required to realise the ideas we had existed, but the software did not. 

This is how the development of scenery -- the framework developed and used in this thesis -- started, motivated by the idea to be able to do laser ablation in virtual reality. It did not take long until more ideas popped up, brought on by meetings and collaborations with Kyle Harrington, Jan Huisken, Stephan Grill, and Raimund Dachselt and their labs: Wouldn't it be awesome to make the framework available to the ImageJ community as part of a plugin? Can we use scenery to render alternative data representations, such as the APR developed by Bevan Cheeseman? Could we even use eye tracking to help users perform cell tracking tasks without going through the annoying task of selecting corresponding cells by-slice? So now, this thesis is the culmination of four years of work on these topics, accompanied by a lot of highs (that I love to remember), and probably just as many lows (most of which I think I have already successfully repressed), and it would not have been possible without the support of many people:

First and foremost, a big thanks to Ivo, for providing outstanding support and freedom, and creating a lab full of friendly, curious,  inspiring, and helpful people that make up an amazing team. Thank you, MOSAIC group, for making work fun! Particularly my office mates Bevan, and later Aryaman have not only made day-to-day business fun and interesting, but continue to be awesome collaborators! Thanks to all other MOSAICans, past and present, for great parties, hikes, amazing food (looking especially at you, Yaser!), and support.

I would like to thank Kyle Harrington, for being an amazing collaborator for many years now. Without Kyle, a lot of the things presented in this thesis would not have materialised, and many bugs would not have been fixed.

Thanks to my TAC members, Pavel Tomancak and Stephan Grill, for providing great feedback, insights and especially support through the years. Thanks to James Sharpe, for agreeing to review this thesis.

Thanks to Ulrich von Zadow and Wolfgang B端schel, for introducing me to the intricacies of Human-Computer Interaction and to user tests, and Raimund Dachselt for agreeing to be my Fachreferent, for insightful discussions and feedback, often nudging me in directions I had never thought of before. Thanks to Stephan Gumhold, for interesting computer graphics discussions, and never letting go unless everything is absolutely clear.

Big thanks to the whole ImageJ community, and especially Curtis Rueden, the hero of the community. Lo誰c Royer and Martin Weigert, collaborating with you on ClearVolume was an amazing experience (I am actually still amazed about how smooth that went!), and the discussions with you provided a lot of inspiration and insight. Tobias Pietzsch, I very much enjoyed our collaboration on out-of-core volume rendering in scenery, and am very thankful for your critical and helpful remarks on software design. 

Thanks to Bevan Cheeseman, Wolfgang B端schel, Martin Weigert, Aryaman Gupta, Kyle Harrington, and Tobias Pietzsch for proofreading this thesis and various help and suggestions. Thanks to all the participants of the user tests, and to the whole MPI-CBG community for being an awesome place to work. And of course to Katja, Alex and Corinna, for a constant supply of high-quality, caffeinated beverages.

Thanks to Holger Steinfurth, for helping me pave the way that ultimately led to this thesis.

Most importantly, thanks to my family and friends, who provided a constant source of support through thesis time. Special thanks to my parents, for their continuous support and always being there for me, and for proofreading and checking my thesis for printing errors. Finally, thanks to this one crazy software bug in my Diploma thesis which took months to find, and seconds to fix, and led me to meet Steffi -- thank you for your help, motivation, support, keen eye on design, amazing cooking, and for your love. And of course for taking my mind off work with hiking, climbing, and vertical gardening in Saxon Switzerland!

